.TH ALFRED.CONF 5 "June 2026" "Alfred" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
alfred.conf \- Alfred runtime configuration file
.SH DESCRIPTION
An Alfred configuration file is a plain text file containing
.B key=value
records.
.PP
Empty lines are ignored. Lines whose first character is
.B #
are ignored. Unknown keys are ignored, so newer configuration files remain
mostly compatible with older binaries. Values are not quoted by the parser; the
text after the first
.B =
is used as the value.
.PP
The file is loaded only when the
.B ALFRED_CONFIG
environment variable points to it:
.EX
ALFRED_CONFIG=./alfred.conf alfred /tmp/project
.EE
.SH BOOLEAN VALUES
Boolean true values are:
.EX
1
true
yes
on
.EE
Every other value is treated as false.
.SH GENERAL KEYS
.TP
.B recursive
Alias for
.BR inotify_recursive .
Controls recursive directory watching for the inotify backend.
.TP
.B use_epoll
Reserved for a future epoll-based event loop. The current runtime does not use
an epoll loop.
.TP
.B flush_immediately
When true, log streams are flushed after writes. The default is true to improve
visibility during development and failures.
.TP
.B output_enabled
Opt-in flag for the record output runtime. The default is false.
When false, Alfred keeps the current compatibility path through
.BR raw.log ,
.BR events.log ,
and
.BR errors.log .
When true with
.BR output_format=jsonl ,
Alfred writes additive JSONL output through the
.B record -> queue -> dispatcher -> writer
path while preserving the compatibility logs.
When true with
.BR output_format=counter ,
Alfred routes records through the same queue and dispatcher boundary and counts
them without formatting JSONL or writing an output file. This is intended for
benchmarks, not as a user-facing output format.
.TP
.B output_format
Writer format for the output runtime. Supported configuration values are
.B text
.BR jsonl ,
and
.BR counter .
The default is
.BR jsonl .
Unsupported values make configuration loading fail.
The current runtime can enable
.B jsonl
as the user-facing writer and
.B counter
as a benchmark no-op writer.
.B text
is reserved for disabled or future configurations.
.TP
.B output_buffer_size
Buffer size, in bytes, for buffered writers such as JSONL. The
default is
.BR 65536 .
Values smaller than
.B 8192
or non-numeric values make configuration loading fail.
.TP
.B output_log
Append-only JSONL output path used when
.B output_enabled=true
and
.BR output_format=jsonl .
It is not opened when
.BR output_format=counter .
The default is
.BR output.jsonl .
.TP
.B workspace_root
Optional declared filesystem workspace boundary for the current Alfred run.
This is runtime context, not backend evidence and not a policy decision. Alfred
does not infer this value from observed paths. If present, the value must be a
non-empty string. An empty value makes configuration loading fail. When
.B output_enabled=true
uses
.BR output_format=jsonl ,
Alfred publishes this value once in the
.B SESSION_CONTEXT
JSONL metadata record instead of copying it onto every filesystem event.
With
.BR output_format=counter ,
the runtime may route the same metadata record through the benchmark counter
sink, but no JSONL output file is written.
.TP
.B workspace_id
Optional opaque workspace correlation label for the current Alfred run. The
value is not parsed as a path or hash by Alfred v0. If present, it must be a
non-empty string that fits the implementation-defined identifier buffer. Empty
or oversized values make configuration loading fail. With
.BR output_format=jsonl ,
Alfred publishes this value once in
.BR SESSION_CONTEXT .
.TP
.B ledger_session_id
Optional opaque ledger/run correlation label for the current Alfred run. This
is not an agent session id and does not prove process or AI-agent attribution.
If present, it must be a non-empty string that fits the implementation-defined
identifier buffer. Empty or oversized values make configuration loading fail.
With
.BR output_format=jsonl ,
Alfred publishes this value once in
.BR SESSION_CONTEXT .
.TP
.B watcher_capacity
Alias for
.BR inotify_watcher_capacity .
Initial watcher table capacity.
.TP
.B event_engine
Semantic engine selector kept only for validation. The only supported value is
.BR core .
The historical value
.B shadow
is invalid.
.TP
.B raw_log
Path of the backend raw log. Default:
.BR raw.log .
.TP
.B event_log
Path of the semantic/diagnostic event log. Default:
.BR events.log .
.TP
.B error_log
Path of the error log. Default:
.BR errors.log .
.SH INOTIFY KEYS
.TP
.B inotify_recursive
Boolean. Enables recursive watch installation for directories. Default:
.BR true .
.TP
.B inotify_watcher_capacity
Initial capacity of the inotify watcher table. Invalid numeric values keep the
previous value. Default:
.BR 128 .
.TP
.B inotify_watch_mask
Comma-separated inotify subscription mask expression.
.PP
A plain list starts from an empty mask:
.EX
inotify_watch_mask=IN_CREATE,IN_DELETE,IN_MODIFY
.EE
.PP
The token
.B default
starts from Alfred's backend-defined default mask:
.EX
inotify_watch_mask=default,-IN_ATTRIB
.EE
.PP
Tokens prefixed with
.B +
are added. Tokens prefixed with
.B -
are removed.
.PP
Supported tokens are:
.EX
IN_ATTRIB
IN_CLOSE_WRITE
IN_CREATE
IN_DELETE
IN_DELETE_SELF
IN_MODIFY
IN_MOVE_SELF
IN_MOVED_FROM
IN_MOVED_TO
IN_UNMOUNT
IN_IGNORED
IN_Q_OVERFLOW
.EE
.PP
Unknown tokens make configuration loading fail.
.TP
.B inotify_audit_events
Comma-separated opt-in audit policy names. These are intentionally not raw
.B IN_*
tokens. Supported values are:
.EX
off
open
access
close-nowrite
open,access,close-nowrite
.EE
.PP
Audit events are visible only in
.BR raw.log .
They do not become
.B ALFRED_RAW_*
events and do not produce core semantic events.
.SH DEFAULTS
The current defaults are:
.EX
inotify_recursive=true
inotify_watcher_capacity=128
inotify_audit_events=off
event_engine=core
output_enabled=false
output_format=jsonl
output_buffer_size=65536
output_log=output.jsonl
raw_log=raw.log
event_log=events.log
error_log=errors.log
flush_immediately=true
use_epoll=false
.EE
.PP
The default inotify watch mask is defined by the inotify backend and includes
the filesystem events, self-events, ignored-watch cleanup, unmount and overflow
diagnostics that Alfred currently understands.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Disable attribute observation:
.EX
inotify_watch_mask=default,-IN_ATTRIB
.EE
.TP
Use custom log paths:
.EX
raw_log=/tmp/alfred.raw.log
event_log=/tmp/alfred.events.log
error_log=/tmp/alfred.errors.log
.EE
.TP
Enable raw-log-only audit events:
.EX
inotify_audit_events=open,access,close-nowrite
.EE
.TP
Keep optional JSONL output disabled:
.EX
output_enabled=false
output_format=jsonl
output_buffer_size=65536
output_log=output.jsonl
.EE
.TP
Enable additive JSONL output:
.EX
output_enabled=true
output_format=jsonl
output_buffer_size=65536
output_log=/tmp/alfred.output.jsonl
.EE
.TP
Enable the runtime counter benchmark path:
.EX
output_enabled=true
output_format=counter
.EE
.TP
Declare workspace/session runtime context:
.EX
workspace_root=/home/user/project
workspace_id=ws-local-project
ledger_session_id=ls-local-run
.EE
.PP
These values are stored as application-owned runtime context. When
.B output_enabled=true
and
.BR output_format=jsonl ,
Alfred writes them once in a
.B SESSION_CONTEXT
metadata record. With output disabled, or with
.BR output_format=counter ,
no user-facing JSONL file is written. These values do not enable Agent Guard,
policy, blocking, would-block decisions, process attribution or network
observation.
.SH NOTES
This file format is intentionally simple and does not yet have include
directives, sections, quoting rules, variable expansion or CLI override
precedence.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR alfred (1),
.BR alfred-events (7),
.BR inotify (7)
