.TH ALFRED 1 "June 2026" "Alfred" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
alfred \- filesystem event engine and future AI agent runtime guard
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B alfred
.IR PATH ...
.br
.B ALFRED_CONFIG=FILE alfred
.IR PATH ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B alfred
starts the Alfred runtime and watches one or more filesystem roots.
The current implementation uses the Linux
.BR inotify (7)
backend, converts backend events into Alfred raw events, passes those raw
events through the core correlator, and writes human-readable log files.
.PP
The current command line is intentionally small. Positional arguments are
interpreted as paths to watch. Alfred does not yet implement
.BR --help ,
.BR --version ,
.BR -c ,
or
.BR --config .
Configuration is loaded through the
.B ALFRED_CONFIG
environment variable.
.PP
The runtime is core-only. Historical shadow mode was removed. If configuration
or environment asks for
.BR shadow ,
startup fails instead of silently falling back.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I PATH
Filesystem root to observe. At least one path is required for a normal
monitoring run. Each startup path is passed to the inotify backend, which
installs a directory-scoped watch and recursively discovers subdirectories when
recursive watching is enabled.
.IP
The current inotify backend accepts directory roots only. Passing a regular
file, symlink, or other non-directory path as a startup root makes startup fail
before Alfred reports successful startup or enters the event loop.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ALFRED_CONFIG
Path to a key-value configuration file. If set, Alfred loads this file after
applying built-in defaults. Invalid configuration makes startup fail.
.TP
.B ALFRED_EVENT_ENGINE
Compatibility validation hook. The only accepted value is
.BR core .
The value
.B shadow
is rejected because the legacy dispatcher no longer exists.
.TP
.B ALFRED_KEEP_TEST_LOGS
Test-suite variable used by project scripts to keep temporary log files after a
test run. It is not a general runtime feature of the Alfred binary.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Alfred reads simple
.B key=value
configuration files. Empty lines and lines starting with
.B #
are ignored. Unknown keys are ignored so configuration files can evolve.
.PP
Common keys are documented in
.BR alfred.conf (5).
.SH LOG FILES
By default Alfred writes the following files in the current working directory:
.TP
.B raw.log
Human-readable backend raw log. For the inotify backend this contains Linux
inotify event names such as
.BR IN_CREATE ,
.BR IN_MOVED_FROM ,
or
.BR IN_Q_OVERFLOW .
.TP
.B events.log
Human-readable event log. It contains semantic core events such as
.B FILE_CREATED
and
.BR DIR_RELOCATED ,
and backend diagnostics such as
.B WATCH_ADDED
or
.BR WATCH_STALE .
.TP
.B errors.log
Error and diagnostic failure log.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The process terminated normally.
.TP
.B non-zero
Startup, configuration, backend initialization, watch installation, or runtime
processing failed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Watch one directory with defaults:
.EX
alfred /tmp/project
.EE
.TP
Watch two roots:
.EX
alfred /tmp/project /tmp/other-root
.EE
.TP
Load configuration from a file:
.EX
ALFRED_CONFIG=./alfred.conf alfred /tmp/project
.EE
.TP
Enable inotify audit raw-log events:
.EX
cat > alfred.conf <<'EOF'
inotify_audit_events=open,access,close-nowrite
EOF
ALFRED_CONFIG=./alfred.conf alfred /tmp/project
.EE
.SH CURRENT LIMITATIONS
.PP
Alfred currently has no stable JSONL output, no public plugin ABI, no fanotify
or eBPF backend, and no production policy engine. Those are roadmap items.
.PP
The current inotify backend can observe filesystem effects, but it is not a
general preventive enforcement mechanism. Blocking before an operation will
require a backend or sandbox mechanism with permission/enforcement capability.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR alfred.conf (5),
.BR alfred-events (7),
.BR inotify (7)
