.TH ALFRED-EVENTS 7 "June 2026" "Alfred" "Alfred Architecture"
.SH NAME
alfred-events \- Alfred event layers, current model, and supported semantics
.SH DESCRIPTION
Alfred separates backend-specific facts from stable semantic events.
This page describes the current runtime model and should be read together with
the Italian Event Model v0 design document in
.IR docs/it/29-event-model-v0.md .
That document defines the future structured record based on layer, category,
and type. This manual page remains a draft until that model is implemented in
code and exposed through stable machine-readable output.
.SH EVENT LAYERS
.SS Backend raw log
The backend raw log records facts close to the operating system backend. With
the current Linux inotify backend, examples are:
.EX
IN_CREATE IN_ISDIR wd=1 path=/tmp/root name=dir
IN_MOVED_FROM wd=1 path=/tmp/root name=old cookie=123
IN_Q_OVERFLOW wd=-1 path= name=
.EE
These lines are useful for debugging and backend diagnostics. They are not the
stable application-facing API.
.SS Alfred raw events
The inotify adapter converts selected backend facts into
.B alfred_raw_event_t
records for the core. Current raw flags are:
.EX
ALFRED_RAW_CREATE
ALFRED_RAW_DELETE
ALFRED_RAW_MODIFY
ALFRED_RAW_ATTRIB
ALFRED_RAW_CLOSE_WRITE
ALFRED_RAW_MOVED_FROM
ALFRED_RAW_MOVED_TO
ALFRED_RAW_OVERFLOW
ALFRED_RAW_ISDIR
.EE
.B ALFRED_RAW_ISDIR
is a modifier, not an action. A modifier-only raw mask is not enough to dispatch
an event to the core.
.SS Core semantic events
The core correlates raw events and emits stable semantic events such as:
.EX
FILE_CREATED
DIR_CREATED
FILE_DELETED
DIR_DELETED
FILE_MODIFIED
FILE_READY
FILE_RENAMED
DIR_RENAMED
FILE_MOVED
DIR_MOVED
FILE_RELOCATED
DIR_RELOCATED
OVERFLOW
.EE
These events are the current user-visible filesystem semantics.
.SS Backend diagnostics
Some events describe backend state rather than filesystem domain semantics:
.EX
WATCH_ADDED
WATCH_REMOVED
WATCH_STALE
WATCH_RESYNC_BEGIN
WATCH_RESYNC_FAILED
WATCH_LOST_QUEUED
WATCH_LOST_RECOVERY_END
.EE
They are important for testing and operations, but they must not be confused
with file or directory events.
.SH CURRENT SEMANTIC RULES
.TP
.B create
.B IN_CREATE
becomes
.B ALFRED_RAW_CREATE
and then
.B FILE_CREATED
or
.B DIR_CREATED
depending on
.BR IN_ISDIR .
.TP
.B delete
.B IN_DELETE
becomes
.B ALFRED_RAW_DELETE
and then
.B FILE_DELETED
or
.BR DIR_DELETED .
.TP
.B modify
.B IN_MODIFY
becomes
.B ALFRED_RAW_MODIFY
and then
.BR FILE_MODIFIED .
The core can debounce repeated modify events.
.TP
.B close-write
.B IN_CLOSE_WRITE
becomes
.B ALFRED_RAW_CLOSE_WRITE
and then
.BR FILE_READY .
This is not a duplicate of
.BR FILE_MODIFIED ;
it means the writer closed the file after writing.
.TP
.B move and rename
.B IN_MOVED_FROM
and
.B IN_MOVED_TO
are correlated by cookie. Same parent and different basename becomes rename.
Different parent and same basename becomes move. Different parent and different
basename becomes relocated.
.TP
.B moved-to fallback
If
.B IN_MOVED_TO
arrives without the matching
.BR IN_MOVED_FROM ,
the core emits a create fallback because an object entered the observed tree.
.TP
.B overflow
.B IN_Q_OVERFLOW
becomes
.B ALFRED_RAW_OVERFLOW
and then
.BR OVERFLOW .
Full recovery after overflow is not complete.
.SH INOTIFY AUDIT EVENTS
The current backend can request these events only when
.B inotify_audit_events
enables them:
.EX
IN_OPEN
IN_ACCESS
IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE
.EE
They are raw-log-only. They do not become
.B ALFRED_RAW_OPEN
or similar raw events, and they do not produce core semantic events. This keeps
filesystem mutation semantics separate from future audit/guardrail streams.
.SH SELF EVENTS AND WATCH STATE
.B IN_MOVE_SELF ,
.B IN_DELETE_SELF ,
.B IN_IGNORED ,
and
.B IN_UNMOUNT
describe the watched object or watch state. Alfred handles them as backend
state first.
.TP
.B IN_MOVE_SELF
Marks the watch stale. Alfred does not emit move, rename, or relocated directly
because inotify does not provide the destination path. Resync or lost-scope
recovery may later restore reliable coverage.
.TP
.B IN_DELETE_SELF
Marks the watch stale and waits for cleanup. Alfred does not currently emit a
semantic delete directly from the self-event.
.TP
.B IN_IGNORED
Means the kernel removed the watch. Alfred removes the watcher entry and emits
diagnostic cleanup.
.TP
.B IN_UNMOUNT
Marks the watch stale and waits for ignored-watch cleanup. It is not treated as
a semantic delete.
.SH LOST-SCOPE RECOVERY
When a stale watch still has useful filesystem identity, Alfred can enqueue a
delayed recovery request. The recovery scans configured roots for the same
identity, updates path prefixes if the object is found, reinstalls missing
watches, and returns the watch subtree to a valid state only when coverage is
complete.
.PP
The current runtime processes recovery synchronously with a small batch size.
A worker thread and public recovery tuning are future work.
.SH EVENT MODEL V0
Event Model v0 formalizes Alfred records around:
.EX
layer
category
type
.EE
It also defines common fields such as:
.EX
schema_version
event_id
seq
ts_monotonic_ns
ts_wall_ns
source_backend
severity
flags
.EE
JSONL, MessagePack, Protobuf, socket output, Alfred Lab and plugin backends
should be built on that structured model, not on ad hoc log strings.
.PP
The controlled record namespace already admits
.B diagnostic + lifecycle + SESSION_CONTEXT
as the metadata/session record name. Its JSONL payload uses
.B workspace.root ,
.B workspace.id
and
.B ledger.session_id
for the C fields
.B record.session.workspace_root ,
.B record.session.workspace_id
and
.B record.session.ledger_session_id .
Empty strings are treated as absent, empty objects are omitted, and the
formatter rejects the session payload on non-
.B SESSION_CONTEXT
records. This does not mean the runtime emits that record yet, and it does not
add per-event workspace/session enrichment.
.PP
For this record family, the accepted tuple is intentionally narrow:
.B SESSION_CONTEXT
is valid only as
.B diagnostic + lifecycle + SESSION_CONTEXT .
The formatter rejects the same type under filesystem/watch categories and
rejects unrelated event types under the lifecycle category.
.SH BACKEND API V0 CONTRACT DRAFT
Backend API v0 is an internal contract draft for future backend wiring. It is
not a stable external plugin ABI yet, but its minimal operations descriptor is
already compile-tested in the source tree.
.PP
The minimal backend operations validator rejects descriptors that cannot be
registered predictably. In v0, an operations descriptor is invalid when:
.IP \(bu 2
the operations descriptor is NULL;
.IP \(bu
the backend name is NULL or empty;
.IP \(bu
the API version is not Backend API v0;
.IP \(bu
the capabilities descriptor is NULL;
.IP \(bu
the capabilities backend name is NULL or empty;
.IP \(bu
the operations backend name and capabilities backend name differ;
.IP \(bu
the operations API version and capabilities API version differ;
.IP \(bu
the capabilities flags field is zero;
.IP \(bu
any lifecycle callback is NULL.
.PP
These rejected cases are part of the contract, not only test details. They are
documented so future backend adapters fail early instead of registering an
ambiguous backend.
.PP
The backend emit envelope is caller-owned. A backend may copy the emit function
pointer and userdata value into its runtime, but must not store the address of
the emit envelope itself. The backend does not own userdata and must not free
it. Records emitted through that callback are borrowed for the duration of the
callback unless the receiver explicitly clones them.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR alfred (1),
.BR alfred.conf (5),
.BR inotify (7)
